There are three principal configuration objects in Reactor: conditions, expressions/variables, and activities.

Conditions are logic tests that Reactor performs. Almost every ReactorSensor will have at least one condition, since, of course, it's job is to react. Reactor conditions can test device states (e.g. light on/off), dates and times, house mode, and other system functions and behaviors.

Expression/Variables are additional variables that you can create based on data elsewhere in the system (or externally, when used with other plugins that source external data, like a weather plugin or SiteSensor). When you create a variable, you assign an expression to it, and any time any dependent value in the expression changes (such as the state of a device), the expression is re-evaluated and the new value of the variable is stored on the ReactorSensor. These variables are then accessible to your condition logic. The principal utility of this is in being able to perform more complex math on a value to prepare it for use in a condition. For example, if your temperature sensor reports temperature in degrees Celsius, but you want to write your condition test for degrees Kelvin, you can use an expression to convert the Celsius value to Kelvin and store it in a variable that can then be used by the condition.

Activities are actions that a ReactorSensor performs when its state changes as a result of conditions being met (or unmet). Activities are very much like scenes in Vera, but have some advantages: first, they are durable--Reactor activities will survive reloads in the midst of execution, including "delayed" activity groups (the activities resume on schedule or as soon as Vera is back up and running). Second, they are more flexible--Reactor activities offer more action types than Vera scenes, and offer more flexibility in Lua. Actions can also use expression variables (see above) in actions (so, for example, you can set a dimming level in an action based on the time of day).

Since ReactorSensors also implement the behavior of a security sensor, their tripped/untripped state can be used to trigger Vera scenes (using Vera's device triggers), although this is now the "old way" of doing things (before Activities). It's generally better to let Reactor to the actions, for the reasons described above. But, the security sensor behavior also allows external systems that subscribe to Vera device states to "see" the ReactorSensor's condition state (via the typical "Tripped" state for security sensors).